Early Life
Fyodor Dostoevsky was born on the 11th of November in 1821 in Moscow, the former USSR. He was an intelligent son of Dr. Mikhail Dostoevsky, an army doctor, while his mother, Maria Dostoevskaya, was a housewife. His parents introduced him to literature and classics at a very young age including Russian writers Karamzin, Derzhavin, and Pushkin and their romantic works and gothic fiction. These early experiences set the grounds for most of his writings.

Education
Fyodor belonged to an upper-class family, and his parents enhanced his love and passion for literature by introducing to classics at a very young age. His early education started from the Academy of Military Engineering in St. Petersburg, where unimaginative and dull routine never allowed him to develop an interest in the military. His penchant for literature was so obsessive that he spent most of his time reading literary works of great writers. After spending two years at the army school, he launched his literary career with a novel, Poor Folk. Upon completing his degree in 1843, he became a sub-lieutenant but resigned to pursue his literary pursuits.

Some Important Facts of His Life
One of the most influential novelists of the Golden Age of Russian Literature, Fyodor Dostoevsky died on the 9th of February in 1881 in St. Petersburg.
A Dostoevsky Museum was established in the apartment where he wrote his novels in 1971.
Numerous memorials were inaugurated in regions and cities including Moscow, Novosibirsk, Omsk, Saint Petersburg, Tallinn, Baden-Baden, and Wiesbaden in his name.
His books have been translated into more than 170 languages besides film and documentary adaptations.
His Career
Fyodor Dostoevsky, an iconic historical figure, started transcribing his feelings on paper at a very young age and earned respect and praise not from the audience but also from the notable literary figures of his age. Although he was destined to be an engineer, yet his love for literature dragged him out of that boring profession and provided him with the ground to express himself freely. He began his literary career fictionalizing the hardships of the poor and the downtrodden. He completed his first novel, Poor Folk, in 1843 followed by another novel, The Double, in the next three years. His first novel earned popularity and immediate success, while the second received a cold reception. After spending four years in prison and four years in army service, Fyodor, once again, turned to writing. He wrote Memoirs from the House of the Dead, in 1861 followed by, Notes from the Underground, in 1864. Later, dealing with the subject of crime, his masterpiece, Crime and Punishment, appeared in 1866. His other notable works include The Idiot, The Possessed, and The Brothers Karamazov.

His Style
Considered as one of the leading modernist writers, Fyodor chose to pen down his emotions and thoughts using a unique style. Instead of writing in straightforward and plain words, he preferred creating psychological and philosophical ideas in his writings. In most of his works, he explored the complex political system of the Russian government. His early works demonstrated the society using the lenses of naturalism and literary realism. However, his later works dealt with religious beliefs, especially the Russian orthodox beliefs and human exploitation. Moreover, elements of gothic fiction are also evident in most of his writings. Regarding literary devices, he often turns to imagery, similes, metaphors, internal dialogues, and sound devices. The recurring themes in most of Fyodor’s writings are poverty, suicide, morality, and human manipulation.